.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Copyright 2018 Nexenta Systems, Inc.
.\"
.Dd July 4, 2018
.Dt ROUTEADM 1M
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm routeadm
.Nd IP forwarding and routing configuration
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl p Op Ar option
.Nm
.Op Fl R Ar root-dir
.Op Fl e Ar option ...
.Op Fl d Ar option ...
.Op Fl r Ar option ...
.Op Fl s Ar var Ns = Ns Ar value
.Nm
.Fl l Ar fmri
.Nm
.Fl m Ar fmri
.Ar key Ns = Ns Ar value Oo Ar key Ns = Ns Ar value Oc Ns ...
.Nm
.Fl u
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command is used to administer system-wide configuration for IP forwarding and
routing.
IP forwarding is the passing of IP packets from one network to another; IP
routing is the use of a routing protocol to determine routes.
.Pp
IP forwarding and routing functions are also represented as services within the
service management facility (SMF), and can be administered by means of
.Xr svcadm 1M
also, using the following fault management resource identifiers (FMRIs):
.Bd -literal
svc:/network/ipv4-forwarding:default
svc:/network/ipv6-forwarding:default
svc:/network/routing/route:default
svc:/network/routing/ripng:default
.Ed
.Pp
See
.Sx EXAMPLES
for relevant examples.
.Pp
In addition to enabling and disabling routing and forwarding,
.Nm
is used to interact with SMF-based routing daemon services.
Routing daemon services are identified by the presence of a
.Nm
application property group, which
.Nm
uses in administering the given service.
Routing daemon services can also specify properties relating to their operation
in the
.Cm routing
application property group; these can be modified by means of
.Nm Fl m .
If an FMRI for a service without such a property group is specified, an error is
issued and the operation is not carried out.
If a routing daemon has not been converted to SMF, the
.Cm ipv4-routing-daemon , ipv6-routing-daemon ,
.Cm ipv4-routing-daemon-args , ipv6-routing-daemon-args ,
and
.Cm ipv4-routing-stop-cmd , ipv6-routing-stop-cmd
variables can be used to specify the appropriate daemon for IPv4 or IPv6
routing.
.Nm
will then run that daemon using the
.Em svc:/network/routing/legacy-routing:ipv4
or
.Em svc:/network/routing/legacy-routing:ipv6
service as appropriate.
This conversion process occurs when you issue an enable
.Pq Fl e ,
disable
.Pq Fl d
or an update
.Pq Fl u
command.
.Pp
The first usage, in the
.Sx SYNOPSIS
above, reports the current configuration.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following command-line options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d Ar option ...
Disable the specified option.
The effect is to prepare the associated services
.Po Em svc:/network/ipv4-forwarding:default
in the case of
.Cm ipv4-forwarding
.Pc
for disabling.
By means of the
.Cm routing-svcs
variable, the routing daemons are specified to be disabled on subsequent boot
or when
.Nm Fl u
is run.
.It Fl e Ar option ...
Enable the specified option.
The effect is to prepare the associated services
.Po Em svc:/network/ipv4-forwarding:default
in the case of
.Cm ipv4-forwarding
.Pc
for enabling.
By means of the
.Cm routing-svcs
variable, the routing daemons are specified to be enabled on subsequent boot or
when
.Nm Fl u
is run.
.It Fl l Ar fmri
List all properties in the routing application property group for the SMF
routing daemon service.
.It Fl m Ar fmri Ar key Ns = Ns Ar value
Change property value of property
.Ar key
to
.Ar value
in routing application property group for the SMF routing daemon service.
For multi-valued properties, the property name can be used multiple times in the
modify operation, and each associated value will be added.
.It Fl p Op Ar option
Print the configuration in parsable format.
If
.Ar option
is specified, only the configuration for the specified option or variable is
displayed.
.It Fl r Ar option ...
Revert the specified option to the system default.
The system defaults are specified in the description of each
.Ar option .
.It Fl R Ar root-dir
Specify an alternate root directory where
.Nm
applies changes.
.Pp
Note: The root file system of any non-global zones must not be referenced with
the
.Fl R
option.
Doing so might damage the global zone's file system, might compromise the
security of the global zone, and might damage the non-global zone's file system.
See
.Xr zones 5 .
.It Fl s Ar key Ns = Ns Ar value
Specify string values for specific variables in a comma-separated list with no
intervening spaces.
If invalid options are specified, a warning message is displayed and the program
exits.
The following variables can be specified:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm routing-svcs Ns = Ns Ar fmrilist
Specifies the routing daemon services to be enabled.
Routing daemon services are determined to be IPv4 or IPv6
.Po and so enabled or disabled when
.Nm Fl e Ns / Ns Fl d Sy ipv4(6)-routing
is run
.Pc
on the basis of property values in the
.Nm
application property group.
Default: empty.
.It Cm ipv4-routing-daemon Ns = Ns Pa full_path_to_routing_daemon
Specifies the routing daemon to be started when
.Cm ipv4-routing
is enabled.
The routing daemon specified must be an executable binary or shell-script.
If the specified program maps to an SMF service, the service will be used, and
daemon arguments to the program will be transferred to the properties of the
service at enable time.
Default: empty string.
.It Cm ipv4-routing-daemon-args Ns = Ns Ar args
Specifies the startup arguments to be passed to the
.Cm ipv4-routing-daemon
when
.Cm ipv4-routing
is enabled.
Default: no arguments
.It Cm ipv4-routing-stop-cmd Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the command to be executed to stop the routing daemon when
.Cm ipv4-routing
is disabled.
.Ar command
can be an executable binary or shell-script, or a string that can be parsed by
.Xr system 3C .
Default: empty string.
.It Cm ipv6-routing-daemon Ns = Ns Pa full_path_to_routing_daemon
Specifies the routing daemon to be started when
.Cm ipv6-routing
is enabled.
The routing daemon specified must be an executable binary or shell-script.
If the specified program maps to an SMF service, the service will be used, and
daemon arguments to the program will be transferred to the properties of the
service at enable time.
Default: empty string.
.It Cm ipv6-routing-daemon-args Ns = Ns Ar args
Specifies the startup arguments to be passed to the
.Cm ipv6-routing-daemon
when
.Cm ipv6-routing
is enabled.
Default: empty string.
.It Cm ipv6-routing-stop-cmd Ns = Ns Ar command
Specifies the command to be executed to stop the routing daemon when
.Cm ipv6-routing
is disabled.
.Ar command
can be an executable binary or shell-script, or a string that can be parsed by
.Xr system 3C .
Default: empty string.
.El
.It Fl u
Apply the currently configured options to the running system.
These options might include enabling or disabling IP forwarding and launching or
killing routing daemons, if any are specified.
It does not alter the state of the system for those settings that have been set
to default.
This option is meant to be used by administrators who do not want to reboot to
apply their changes.
In addition, this option upgrades non-SMF configurations from the invocations
of daemon stop commands, which might include a set of arguments, to a simple
enabling of the appropriate service.
.El
.Pp
Multiple
.Fl e ,
.Fl d ,
and
.Fl r
options can be specified on the command line.
Changes made by
.Fl e ,
.Fl d ,
and
.Fl r
are persistent, but are not applied to the running system unless
.Nm
is called later with the
.Fl u
option.
.Pp
Use the following options as arguments to the
.Fl e ,
.Fl d ,
and
.Fl r
options
.Po shown above as
.Ar option ...
.Pc :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm ipv4-forwarding
Controls the global forwarding configuration for all IPv4 interfaces.
The system default is
.Cm disabled .
If enabled, IP will forward IPv4 packets to and from interfaces when
appropriate.
If disabled, IP will not forward IPv4 packets to and from interfaces when
appropriate.
The SMF service associated with this configuration variable is
.Em svc:/network/routing/ipv4-forwarding .
This service will be enabled or disabled as appropriate when
.Nm
is called with the
.Fl u
option.
As an alternative, you can use
.Xr svcadm 1M .
Services that require
.Cm ipv4-forwarding
to be enabled should specify a dependency on this service.
.It Cm ipv4-routing
Determines whether an IPv4 routing daemon is run.
The system default is
.Cm disabled .
The value of this option reflects the state of all IPv4 routing services, such
that if any IPv4 routing service is enabled,
.Cm ipv4-routing
is enabled.
This allows users to interact with routing services using
.Xr svcadm 1M ,
as well as through
.Nm .
IPv4 routing services, specified by means of the
.Cm routing-svcs
variable, will be prepared for enable on next boot when the user explicitly
enables
.Cm ipv4-routing .
.It Cm ipv6-forwarding
Controls the global forwarding configuration for all IPv6 interfaces.
The system default is
.Cm disabled .
If enabled, IP will forward IPv6 packets to and from interfaces when
appropriate.
If disabled, IP will not forward IPv6 packets to and from interfaces when
appropriate.
The SMF service associated with this configuration variable is
.Em svc:/network/routing/ipv6-forwarding .
This service will be enabled or disabled as appropriate when
.Nm
is called with the
.Fl u
option, or
.Xr svcadm 1M
is used.
Services that require
.Cm ipv6-forwarding
to be enabled should specify a dependency on this service.
.It Cm ipv6-routing
Determines whether an IPv6 routing daemon is run.
The system default is
.Cm disabled .
The value of this option reflects the state of all IPv6 routing services, such
that, if any IPv6 routing service is enabled,
.Cm ipv6-routing
is enabled.
This allows users to interact with routing services via
.Xr svcadm 1M
as well as through
.Nm .
IPv6 routing services, specified by means of the
.Cm routing-svcs
variable, will be prepared for enable on next boot when the user explicitly
enables
.Cm ipv6-routing .
.El
.Pp
The forwarding and routing settings are related but not mutually dependent.
For example, a router typically forwards IP packets and uses a routing protocol,
but nothing would prevent an administrator from configuring a router that
forwards packets and does not use a routing protocol.
In that case, the administrator would enable forwarding, disable routing, and
populate the router's routing table with static routes.
.Pp
The forwarding settings are global settings.
Each interface also has an
.Em IFF_ROUTER
forwarding flag that determines whether packets can be forwarded to or from a
particular interface.
That flag can be independently controlled by means of
.Xr ifconfig 1M
router option.
When the global forwarding setting is changed
.Po that is,
.Fl u
is issued to change the value from
.Cm enabled
to
.Cm disabled
or vice-versa
.Pc ,
all interface flags in the system are changed simultaneously to reflect the new
global policy.
Interfaces configured by means of DHCP automatically have their
interface-specific
.Em IFF_ROUTER
flag cleared.
.Pp
When a new interface is plumbed by means of
.Nm ifconfig ,
the value of the interface-specific forwarding flag is set according to the
current global forwarding value.
Thus, the forwarding value forms the "default" for all new interfaces.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /etc/inet/routing.conf
Parameters for IP forwarding and routing.
(Not to be edited.)
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy Example 1 No Enabling IPv4 Forwarding
IPv4 forwarding is disabled by default.
The following command enables IPv4 forwarding:
.Bd -literal
# routeadm -e ipv4-forwarding
.Ed
.It Sy Example 2 No Apply Configured Settings to the Running System
In the previous example, a system setting was changed, but will not take effect
until the next reboot unless a command such as the following is used:
.Bd -literal
# routeadm -u
.Ed
.Pp
An alternative to the above two steps is to simply enable the equivalent SMF
service:
.Bd -literal
# svcadm enable svc:/network/ipv4-forwarding
.Ed
.Pp
\&...or, using the abbreviated FMRI:
.Bd -literal
# svcadm enable ipv4-forwarding
.Ed
.It Sy Example 3 No Making a Setting Revert to its Default
To make the setting changed in the first example revert to its default, enter
the following:
.Bd -literal
# routeadm -r ipv4-forwarding
# routeadm -u
.Ed
.It Sy Example 4 No Starting in.routed with the -q Flag
Setting the
.Fl q
flag is represented in the SMF service by setting the
.Cm quiet_mode
property to true.
The following sequence of commands starts
.Nm in.routed
with the
.Fl q
flag:
.Bd -literal
# routeadm -m route:default quiet_mode=true
# routeadm -e ipv4-routing -u
.Ed
.Pp
See
.Xr in.routed 1M
for details of property names and how they relate to daemon behavior.
.El
.Sh INTERFACE STABILITY
.Sy Stable .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifconfig 1M ,
.Xr in.routed 1M ,
.Xr svcadm 1M ,
.Xr gateways 4 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr smf 5
