.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 Nexenta Systems, Inc.
.\"
.Dd November 22, 2017
.Dt SHARESMB 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sharesmb
.Nd SMB share options
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm abe Ns = Ns Cm true Ns | Ns Cm false
Set the access-based enumeration
.Pq ABE
policy for the share.
When set to
.Cm true ,
ABE filtering is enabled on the share and directory entries to which the
requesting user has no access will be omitted from directory listings
returned to the client.
When set to
.Cm false
or not defined, ABE filtering will not be performed on this share.
This property is not defined by default.
.It Cm ad-container
Specifies the AD container in which to publish shares.
.Pp
The AD container is specified as a comma-separated list of attribute name-value
pairs using the LDAP distinguished name
.Pq DN
or relative distinguished name
.Pq RDN
format.
The DN or RDN must be specified in LDAP format using the
.Cm cn Ns = ,
.Cm ou Ns = ,
and
.Cm dc Ns =
prefixes:
.Bl -tag -compact -width "cn"
.It Cm cn
represents the common name
.It Cm ou
represents the organizational unit
.It Cm dc
represents the domain component
.El
.Pp
.Cm cn Ns = ,
.Cm ou Ns = ,
and
.Cm dc Ns =
are attribute types.
The attribute type used to describe an object's RDN is called the naming
attribute, which, for ADS, includes the following object classes:
.Bl -tag -compact -width "cn"
.It Cm cn
.Em user
object class
.It Cm ou
organizational unit
.Pq OU
object class
.It Cm dc
.Em domainDns
object class
.El
.It Cm catia Ns = Ns Cm true Ns | Ns Cm false
CATIA V4 uses characters in file names that are considered to be invalid by
Windows.
CATIA V5 is available on Windows.
A CATIA V4 file could be inaccessible to Windows clients if the file name
contains any of the characters that are considered illegal in Windows.
By default, CATIA character substitution is not performed.
.Pp
If the
.Cm catia
property is set to
.Cm true ,
the following character substitution is applied to file names:
.Bd -literal
CATIA    CATIA
V4 UNIX  V5 Windows
  "      \e250   0x00a8  Dieresis
  *      \e244   0x00a4  Currency Sign
  /      \e370   0x00f8  Latin Small Letter O with Stroke
  :      \e367   0x00f7  Division Sign
  <      \e253   0x00ab  Left-Pointing Double Angle Quotation Mark
  >      \e273   0x00bb  Right-Pointing Double Angle Quotation Mark
  ?      \e277   0x00bf  Inverted Question Mark
  \e      \e377   0x00ff  Latin Small Letter Y with Dieresis
  |      \e246   0x00a6  Broken Bar
.Ed
.It Cm cksum Ns = Ns Ar cksumlist
Set the share to attempt to use end-to-end checksums.
The value
.Ar cksumlist
specifies the checksum algorithms that should be used.
.It Cm csc Ns = Ns Cm manual Ns | Ns Cm auto Ns | Ns Cm vdo Ns | Ns Cm disabled
Set the client-side caching policy for a share.
Client-side caching is a client feature and offline files are managed entirely
by the clients.
.Pp
The following are valid values for the
.Cm csc
property:
.Bl -tag -width "disabled"
.It Cm manual
Clients are permitted to cache files from the specified share for offline use as
requested by users.
However, automatic file-by-file reintegration is not permitted.
.Cm manual
is the default value.
.It Cm auto
Clients are permitted to automatically cache files from the specified share for
offline use and file-by-file reintegration is permitted.
.It Cm vdo
Clients are permitted to automatically cache files from the specified share for
offline use, file-by-file reintegration is permitted, and clients are permitted
to work from their local cache even while offline.
.It Cm disabled
Client-side caching is not permitted for this share.
.El
.It Cm guestok Ns = Ns Cm true Ns | Ns Cm false
Set the guest access policy for the share.
When set to
.Cm true
guest access is allowed on this share.
When set to
.Cm false
or not defined guest access is not allowed on this share.
This property is not defined by default.
.Pp
An
.Xr idmap 1M
name-based rule can be used to map
.Em guest
to any local username, such as
.Em guest
or
.Em nobody .
If the local account has a password in
.Pa /var/smb/smbpasswd
the guest connection will be authenticated against that password.
Any connection made using an account that maps to the local guest account will
be treated as a guest connection.
.It Cm encrypt Ns = Ns Cm disabled Ns | Ns Cm enabled Ns | Ns Cm required
Controls SMB3 per-share encryption.
This is similar to the global
.Em smbd/encrypt
option.
For requests on a particular share, the server's behavior is controlled by the
stricter of this option and
.Em smbd/encrypt .
.Pp
When set to
.Cm disabled ,
the server will not ask clients to encrypt requests.
When set to
.Cm enabled ,
the server will ask clients to encrypt requests,
but will not require that they do so.
Any message than can be encrypted will be encrypted.
When set to
.Cm required ,
the server will deny access to or disconnect any client that does not support
encryption or fails to encrypt requests that they should.
.Pp
In other words, the
.Cm enabled
behavior is that any message that CAN be encrypted SHOULD be encrypted, while
the
.Cm required
behavior is that any message that CAN be encrypted MUST be encrypted.
.Pp
This property is not defined by default.
.It Cm none Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Access is not allowed to any client that matches the access list.
The exception is when the access list is an asterisk
.Pq Qq * ,
in which case
.Cm ro
or
.Cm rw
can override
.Cm none .
See
.Xr shareacl 5
for the description of
.Ar access-list .
.It Cm ro
Sharing is read-only to all clients.
.It Cm ro Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Sharing is read-only to the clients listed in
.Ar access-list ;
overrides the
.Cm rw
option for the clients specified.
See
.Xr shareacl 5
for the description of
.Ar access-list .
.It Cm rw
Sharing is read-write to all clients.
.It Cm rw Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Sharing is read-write to the clients listed in
.Ar access-list ;
overrides the
.Cm ro
option for the clients specified.
See
.Xr shareacl 5
for the description of
.Ar access-list .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sharectl 1M ,
.Xr smbadm 1M ,
.Xr zfs 1M ,
.Xr smb 4 ,
.Xr shareacl 5
