.\"
.\" This file and its contents are supplied under the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License ("CDDL"), version 1.0.
.\" You may only use this file in accordance with the terms of version
.\" 1.0 of the CDDL.
.\"
.\" A full copy of the text of the CDDL should have accompanied this
.\" source.  A copy of the CDDL is also available via the Internet at
.\" http://www.illumos.org/license/CDDL.
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright 2017 Nexenta Systems, Inc.
.\"
.Dd November 22, 2017
.Dt SHAREACL 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm shareacl
.Nd access list used by NFS and SMB services
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Ar access_list
is a colon-separated list whose components may be any number of the following:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Em hostname
The name of a host.
With a server configured for DNS or LDAP naming in the nsswitch
.Cm hosts
entry, any hostname must be represented as a fully qualified DNS or LDAP name.
.It Em netgroup
A netgroup contains a number of hostnames.
With a server configured for DNS or LDAP naming in the nsswitch
.Cm hosts
entry, any hostname in a netgroup must be represented as a fully qualified DNS
or LDAP name.
.It Em domain name suffix
To use domain membership the server must use DNS or LDAP to resolve hostnames to
IP addresses; that is, the
.Cm hosts
entry in the
.Pa /etc/nsswitch.conf
must specify
.Cm dns
or
.Cm ldap
ahead of
.Cm nis
since only DNS and LDAP return the full domain name of the host.
Other name services like NIS cannot be used to resolve hostnames on the server
because when mapping an IP address to a hostname they do not return domain
information.
For example,
.Pq NIS
.Ql 172.16.45.9 --> "myhost"
and
.Pq DNS or LDAP
.Ql 172.16.45.9 --> "myhost.mydomain.mycompany.com"
.Pp
The domain name suffix is distinguished from hostnames and netgroups by a
prefixed dot.
For example,
.Ql rw=.mydomain.mycompany.com
.Pp
A single dot can be used to match a hostname with no suffix.
For example,
.Ql rw=.
matches
.Em mydomain
but not
.Em mydomain.mycompany.com .
This feature can be used to match hosts resolved through NIS rather
than DNS and LDAP.
.It Em network
The network or subnet component is preceded by an at-sign
.Pq Qq @ .
It can be either a name or a dotted address.
If a name, it is converted to a dotted address by
.Xr getnetbyname 3SOCKET .
For example,
.Ql =@mynet
would be equivalent to
.Ql =@172.16
or
.Ql =@172.16.0.0
.Pp
The network prefix assumes an octet-aligned netmask determined from the zeroth
octet in the low-order part of the address up to and including the high-order
octet, if you want to specify a single IP address
.Pq see below .
In the case where network prefixes are not byte-aligned, the syntax allows a
mask length to be specified explicitly following a slash
.Pq Qq /
delimiter.
For example,
.Ql =@theothernet/17
or
.Ql =@172.16.132/22 ,
where the mask is the number of leftmost contiguous significant bits in the
corresponding IP address.
.Pp
When specifying individual IP addresses, use the same @ notation described
above, without a netmask specification.
For example,
.Ql =@172.16.132.14 .
Multiple, individual IP addresses would be specified, for example, as
.Ql root=@172.16.132.20:@172.16.134.20 .
.El
.Pp
A prefixed minus sign
.Pq Qq -
denies access to that component of
.Ar access_list .
The list is searched sequentially until a match is found that either grants or
denies access, or until the end of the list is reached.
For example, if host
.Em terra
is in the
.Em engineering
netgroup, then
.Ql rw=-terra:engineering
denies access to
.Em terra
but
.Ql rw=engineering:-terra
grants access to
.Em terra .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getnetbyname 3SOCKET ,
.Xr sharenfs 5 ,
.Xr sharesmb 5
