.\"
.\" CDDL HEADER START
.\"
.\" The contents of this file are subject to the terms of the
.\" Common Development and Distribution License (the "License").
.\" You may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"
.\" You can obtain a copy of the license at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE
.\" or http://www.opensolaris.org/os/licensing.
.\" See the License for the specific language governing permissions
.\" and limitations under the License.
.\"
.\" When distributing Covered Code, include this CDDL HEADER in each
.\" file and include the License file at usr/src/OPENSOLARIS.LICENSE.
.\" If applicable, add the following below this CDDL HEADER, with the
.\" fields enclosed by brackets "[]" replaced with your own identifying
.\" information: Portions Copyright [yyyy] [name of copyright owner]
.\"
.\" CDDL HEADER END
.\"
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2008, Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved
.\" Copyright 2017 Nexenta Systems, Inc.
.\" Copyright 2016 Jason King.
.\"
.Dd November 22, 2017
.Dt SHARENFS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sharenfs
.Nd NFS share options
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm aclok
Allows the NFS server to do access control for NFS Version 2 clients (running
SunOS 2.4 or earlier).
When
.Cm aclok
is set on the server, maximal access is given to all clients.
For example, with
.Cm aclok
set, if anyone has read permissions, then everyone does.
If
.Cm aclok
is not set, minimal access is given to all clients.
.It Cm anon Ns = Ns Ar uid
Set
.Ar uid
to be the effective user ID of unknown users.
By default, unknown users are given the effective user ID
.Dv UID_NOBODY .
If uid is set to -1, access is denied.
.It Ar charset Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Where
.Ar charset
is one of:
.Cm euc-cn , euc-jp , euc-jpms , euc-kr , euc-tw , iso8859-1 , iso8859-2 ,
.Cm iso8859-5 , iso8859-6 , iso8859-7 , iso8859-8 , iso8859-9 , iso8859-13 ,
.Cm iso8859-15 , koi8-r .
.Pp
Clients that match the
.Ar access-list
for one of these properties will be assumed to be using that character set and
file and path names will be converted to UTF-8 for the server.
.It Cm gidmap Ns = Ns Ar mapping Ns Oo ~ Ns Ar mapping Oc Ns ...
Where
.Ar mapping
is:
.Oo Ar clnt Oc : Ns Oo Ar srv Oc : Ns Ar access-list
.Pp
Allows remapping the group ID
.Pq gid
in the incoming request to some other gid.
This effectively changes the identity of the user in the request to that of
some other local user.
.Pp
For clients where the gid in the incoming request is
.Ar clnt
and the client matches the
.Ar access-list ,
change the group ID to
.Ar srv .
If
.Ar clnt
is asterisk
.Pq Qq * ,
all groups are mapped by this rule.
If
.Ar clnt
is omitted, all unknown groups are mapped by this rule.
If
.Ar srv
is set to -1, access is denied.
If
.Ar srv
is omitted, the gid is mapped to
.Dv UID_NOBODY .
.Pp
Multiple
.Ar mapping Ns s
in the
.Cm gidmap Ns =
option are separated by tilde
.Pq Qq ~
and are evaluated in the specified order until a match is found.
Both
.Cm root Ns =
and
.Cm root_mapping Ns =
options
.Pq if specified
are evaluated before the
.Cm gidmap Ns =
option.
The
.Cm gidmap Ns =
option is skipped in the case where the client matches the
.Cm root Ns =
option.
.Pp
The
.Cm gidmap Ns =
option is evaluated before the
.Cm anon Ns =
option.
.Pp
This option is supported only for AUTH_SYS.
.It Cm index Ns = Ns Ar file
Load
.Ar file
rather than a listing of the directory containing this file when the
directory is referenced by an NFS URL.
.It Cm log Ns Oo = Ns Ar tag Oc
Enables NFS server logging for the specified file system.
The optional
.Ar tag
determines the location of the related log files.
The
.Ar tag
is defined in
.Pa /etc/nfs/nfslog.conf .
If no
.Ar tag
is specified, the default values associated with the global tag in
.Pa /etc/nfs/nfslog.conf
are used.
Support of NFS server logging is only available for NFS Version 2 and
Version 3 requests.
.It Cm nohide
By default, if server exports two filesystems, one of which is mounted as a
child of the other, NFSv2 and NFSv3 clients must mount both filesystems
explicitly in order to access them.
If a client only mounts the parent, it will see an empty directory at the
location where the other filesystem is mounted.
.Pp
Setting the
.Cm nohide
option on a filesystem causes it to no longer be hidden in this manner, and the
client will be able to move from the parent filesystem to this one without
noticing the change.
However, some NFS clients or applications may not function correctly when this
option is used.
In particular, files on different underlying filesystems may appear to have the
same inode numbers.
The
.Cm nohide
option only applies to NFSv2 and NFSv3 requests.
.It Cm noaclfab
By default, the NFS server will fabricate POSIX-draft style ACLs in response
to ACL requests from NFSv2 or NFSv3 clients accessing shared file systems that
do not support POSIX-draft ACLs
.Pq such as ZFS .
Specifying
.Cm noaclfab
disables this behavior.
.It Cm none Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Access is not allowed to any client that matches the access list.
The exception is when the access list is an asterisk
.Pq Qq * ,
in which case
.Cm ro
or
.Cm rw
can override
.Cm none .
.It Cm nosub
Prevents clients from mounting subdirectories of shared directories.
For example, if
.Pa /export
is shared with the
.Cm nosub
option on server
.Em fooey
then a NFS client cannot do
.Ql mount -F nfs fooey:/export/home/mnt
.Pp
NFSv4 does not use the MOUNT protocol.
The
.Cm nosub
option only applies to NFSv2 and NFSv3 requests.
.It Cm nosuid
By default, clients are allowed to create files on the shared file system with
the setuid or setgid mode enabled.
Specifying
.Cm nosuid
causes the server file system to silently ignore any attempt to enable the
setuid or setgid mode bits.
.It Cm public
Moves the location of the public file handle from root
.Pq Qq Pa /
to the exported directory for WebNFS-enabled browsers and clients.
This option does not enable WebNFS service; WebNFS is always on.
Only one file system per server may use this option.
Any other option, including the
.Cm ro Ns = Ns Ar list
and
.Cm rw Ns = Ns Ar list
options can be included with the
.Cm public
option.
.It Cm ro
Sharing is read-only to all clients.
.It Cm ro Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Sharing is read-only to the clients listed in
.Ar access-list ;
overrides the
.Cm rw
suboption for the clients specified.
See
.Xr shareacl 5
for the description of
.Ar access-list .
.It Cm root Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Only root users from the hosts specified in
.Ar access-list
have root access.
See
.Xr shareacl 5
for the description of
.Ar access-list .
By default, no host has root access, so root users are mapped to an anonymous
user ID
.Po see the
.Cm anon Ns = Ns Ar uid
option described above
.Pc .
Netgroups can be used if the file system shared is using AUTH_SYS.
.It Cm root_mapping Ns = Ns Ar uid
For a client that is allowed root access, map the root UID to the specified
user ID.
.It Cm rw
Sharing is read-write to all clients.
.It Cm rw Ns = Ns Ar access-list
Sharing is read-write to the clients listed in
.Ar access-list ;
overrides the
.Cm ro
suboption for the clients specified.
See
.Xr shareacl 5
for the description of
.Ar access-list .
.It Cm sec Ns = Ns Ar mode Ns Oo : Ns Ar mode Oc Ns ...
Sharing uses one or more of the specified security modes.
The
.Ar mode
in the
.Cm sec Ns = Ns Ar mode
option must be a mode name supported on the client.
If the
.Cm sec Ns =
option is not specified, the default security mode used is AUTH_SYS.
Multiple
.Cm sec Ns =
options can be specified on the command line, although each mode can appear
only once.
The security modes are defined in
.Xr nfssec 5 .
.Pp
Each
.Cm sec Ns =
option specifies modes that apply to any subsequent
.Cm window Ns = ,
.Cm rw ,
.Cm ro ,
.Cm rw Ns = ,
.Cm ro Ns = ,
and
.Cm root Ns =
options that are provided before another
.Cm sec Ns =
option.
Each additional
.Cm sec Ns =
resets the security mode context, so that more
.Cm window Ns = ,
.Cm rw ,
.Cm ro ,
.Cm rw Ns = ,
.Cm ro Ns = ,
and
.Cm root Ns =
options can be supplied for additional modes.
.It Cm sec Ns = Ns Cm none
If the option
.Cm sec Ns = Ns Cm none
is specified when the client uses AUTH_NONE, or if the client uses a security
mode that is not one that the file system is shared with, then the credential
of each NFS request is treated as unauthenticated.
See the
.Cm anon Ns = Ns Ar uid
option for a description of how unauthenticated requests are handled.
.It Cm secure
This option has been deprecated in favor of the
.Cm sec Ns = Ns Cm dh
option.
.It Cm uidmap Ns = Ns Ar mapping Ns Oo ~ Ns Ar mapping Oc Ns ...
Where
.Ar mapping
is:
.Oo Ar clnt Oc : Ns Oo Ar srv Oc : Ns Ar access-list
.Pp
Allows remapping the user ID
.Pq uid
in the incoming request to some other uid.
This effectively changes the identity of the user in the request to that of
some other local user.
.Pp
For clients where the uid in the incoming request is
.Ar clnt
and the client matches the
.Ar access-list ,
change the user ID to
.Ar srv .
If
.Ar clnt
is asterisk
.Pq Qq * ,
all users are mapped by this rule.
If
.Ar clnt
is omitted, all unknown users are mapped by this rule.
If
.Ar srv
is set to -1, access is denied.
If
.Ar srv
is omitted, the uid is mapped to
.Dv UID_NOBODY .
.Pp
Multiple
.Ar mapping Ns s
in the
.Cm uidmap Ns =
option are separated by tilde
.Pq Qq ~
and are evaluated in the specified order until a match is found.
Both
.Cm root Ns =
and
.Cm root_mapping Ns =
options
.Pq if specified
are evaluated before the
.Cm uidmap Ns =
option.
The
.Cm uidmap Ns =
option is skipped in the case where the client matches the
.Cm root Ns =
option.
.Pp
The
.Cm uidmap Ns =
option is evaluated before the
.Cm anon Ns =
option.
.Pp
This option is supported only for AUTH_SYS.
.It Cm window Ns = Ns Ar value
When sharing with
.Cm sec Ns = Ns Cm dh ,
set the maximum life time
.Pq in seconds
of the RPC request's credential
.Pq in the authentication header
that the NFS server allows.
If a credential arrives with a life time larger than what is allowed, the NFS
server rejects the request.
The default value is 30000 seconds
.Pq 8.3 hours .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/nfs/nfslog.conf"
.It Pa /etc/dfs/fstypes
list of system types, NFS by default
.It Pa /etc/dfs/sharetab
system record of shared file systems
.It Pa /etc/nfs/nfslogtab
system record of logged file systems
.It Pa /etc/nfs/nfslog.conf
logging configuration file
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mount 1M ,
.Xr mountd 1M ,
.Xr nfsd 1M ,
.Xr nfslogd 1M ,
.Xr share 1M ,
.Xr unshare 1M ,
.Xr netgroup 4 ,
.Xr nfslog.conf 4 ,
.Xr acl 5 ,
.Xr attributes 5 ,
.Xr nfssec 5 ,
.Xr shareacl 5
.Sh NOTES
If the
.Cm sec Ns =
option is presented at least once, all uses of the
.Cm window Ns = ,
.Cm rw ,
.Cm ro ,
.Cm rw Ns = ,
.Cm ro Ns = ,
and
.Cm root Ns =
options must come after the first
.Cm sec Ns =
option.
If the
.Cm sec Ns =
option is not presented, then
.Cm sec Ns = Ns Cm sys
is implied.
.Pp
If one or more explicit
.Cm sec Ns =
options are presented,
.Cm sys
must appear in one of the options mode lists for accessing using the AUTH_SYS
security mode to be allowed.
.Pp
Access checking for the
.Cm window Ns = ,
.Cm rw ,
.Cm ro ,
.Cm rw Ns = ,
and
.Cm ro Ns =
options is done per NFS request, instead of per mount request.
.Pp
The
.Cm ro Ns =
and
.Cm rw Ns =
options are guaranteed to work over UDP and TCP but may not work over other
transport providers.
.Pp
The
.Cm root Ns =
option with AUTH_SYS is guaranteed to work over UDP and TCP but may not work
over other transport providers.
.Pp
The
.Cm root Ns =
option with AUTH_DES is guaranteed to work over any transport provider.
.Pp
There are no interactions between the
.Cm root Ns =
option and the
.Cm ro ,
.Cm rw ,
.Cm ro Ns = ,
and
.Cm rw Ns =
options.
Putting a host in the root list does not override the semantics of the other
options.
The access the host gets is the same as when the
.Cm root Ns =
option is absent.
.Pp
The
.Cm nohide
option violates RFC 1094,
.%T "Network File System Protocol Specification"
and RFC 1813,
.%T "NFS: Network File System Version 3 Protocol Specification"
and is provided for compatibility with Linux NFS.
